# FOCS Homework 11, for Day 12

You may edit your answers into this file, or add a separate file in the same directory.

If you add a separate file, please include the following at the top:

```
Student Name: Daniel Bishop
Check one:
[ ] I completed this assignment without assistance or external resources.
[ ] I completed this assignment with assistance from ___
   and/or using these external resources: ___
```

## I. Formal Proofs

Use the rules of inference from class (reprinted below) to construct formal, numbered proofs of the following:

### 1. 

Assuming p -> q and p -> r, prove p -> q && r

1. p -> q
2. p -> r
3. !p || q    				1, Material implication
4. !p || r    				2, Material implication
5. (!p || q) && (!p || r)   3, 4, Conjunction
6. !p || (q && r)           5, Distribution
7. p -> q 					6, De Morgan's
QED

### 2.

Assuming p -> q || r and p -> q || !r, prove p -> q

1. p -> q || r
2. p -> q || !r
3. !p || (q || r)			1, Material implication
4. !p || (q || !r)			2, Material implication
5. (!p || (q || r)) && (!p || (q || !r))  3, 4, Conjunction
6. !p || ((q || r) && (q || !r))  5, Distribution
7. p -> ((q || r) && (q || !r)) 6, De Morgan's
8. p -> q || (r && !r)      6, Distribution
9. p -> q || F 				7, Negation
10. p -> q 					8, Identity
QED

## II. Truth tables

Use a truth table to show the equivalence of the assumptions and conclusion from problem 1, above:  Assuming _p -> q_ and _p -> r_, prove _p -> (q AND r)_

[Style note:  what is the canonical order of the rows in a truth table for three propositions?]

 p | q | r | q && r 
---|---|---|--------
 T | T | T | T
 F | F | F | F


## III. Tautology, satisfiable, contradiction

Which of the following are tautologies?  Satisfiable?  Unsatisfiable (contradictions)?

### 1. p && q && r -> p || q

Tautology, there is no case where the statement is false. In order for the left hand side to be true, the right hand must also be true,
and when the left hand side if false, so is the right hand.

### 2. (p -> q && q -> r) -> (p -> r)
pqr
TTT: T && T -> T => T
TTF: T && F -> F => T
TFT: F && T -> T => T
FTT: T && T -> T => T
TFF: F && T -> F => T
FTF: T && F -> T => T
FFT: T && T -> T => T
FFF: T && T -> T => T

Tautology as seen in truth table above.

### 3. (p -> q) -> p

pq
TT: T -> T => T
TF: F -> T => T
FT: T -> F => F
FF: T -> F => F

Satisfiable but not tautological.

### 4. (p || q || r) && (!p || !q || !r) && (p || !q) && (q || !r) || (r || !p)

Tautological.

### 5. [** challenge/optional] _(p <=> (q OR r)) -> ((NOT q) -> (p AND r))_



## IV. CNF

Transform the following formula into conjunctive normal form.  Show your steps.

1. p || (q && !(r && (s -> t)))
2. p || (q && !(r && (!s || t)))
3. p || (q && (!r || !(!s || t)))
4. p || (q && (!r || (s && !t)))
5. p || (q && ((!r || s) && (!r || !t)))
6. p || (q && (!r || s) && (!r || !t))
7. (p || q) && (p || !r || s) && (p || !r || !t)

## V. Short certificate

Demonstrate that the formula in problem IV is satisfiable.  Explain whether you used a  "short certificate" or exhaustive enumeration to make this determination.

When p is true, then the expression is true.
When p is false and q is also false, the expression is false.
Thus it is satisfiable but not tautological.
Becasue of the format of the conjunctive normal form, it is easy to find a case where the statement is true, and where it is false.
This is the short certificate method.

[several problems adapted from Ullman FOCS ch12]
